WIP: add conc draft (#5962)
sourcegraph/about: content/blogposts/2023/building-conc-better-structured-concurrency-for-go.md

---
title: 'Building Conc: better structured concurrency for go'
authors:
  - name: Camden Cheek
    url: https://twitter.com/camdendcheek

> publishDate: 2023-01-30T10:00-07:00

Reviewer: `2023-01-25T10:00-07:00`

description: 'We built and release conc, an open-source library which makes it easier and safer to write concurrent code in Go.'
tags: [blog]
slug: 'building-conc-better-structured-concurrency-for-go'
published: true
heroImage: https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/conc-og-social.png
socialImage: https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/conc-og-social.png 
---

> # Building Conc: better structured concurrency for go

Reviewer: Remove

	p := pool.NewWithResults[string]().WithContext(ctx)
	for _, firstName := range firstNames {
		firstName := firstName
		p.Go(func(ctx context.Context) (string, error) {
			return fetchLastName(ctx, firstName)
		})
	}
	return p.Wait()
}
```

Or equivalently using `iter` :

```go
func fetchLastNames2(ctx context.Context, firstNames []string) ([]string, error) {
	return iter.MapErr(firstNames, func(firstName *string) (string, error) {
		return fetchLastName(ctx, *firstName)
	})
}
```

There are several other examples (along with the equivalent standard library code) in the [conc GitHub](https://github.com/sourcegraph/conc/) based around `conc`'s three main goals:

* [Making it harder to leak Goroutines](https://github.com/sourcegraph/conc/blob/main/README.md#goal-1-make-it-harder-to-leak-goroutines)
* [Handling panics gracefully](https://github.com/sourcegraph/conc/blob/main/README.md#goal-2-handle-panics-gracefully)
* [Making concurrent code easier to read](https://github.com/sourcegraph/conc/blob/main/README.md#goal-3-make-concurrent-code-easier-to-read)

## Using conc for parallel stream processing

> Something else conc does taht is more specific to our usecase as Sourcegraph is parallel stream processing. While indexing large amounts of code, we often end up with multiple streams of results that we want to post-process. Each result in the stream requires at least one network request, for example to look up permission on a repository or to fetch the rest of a file for a specific query match.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At Sourcegraph, we do a lot of parallel processing of ordered streams. While searching large amounts of code, we often end up with streams of results that we want to post-process. Each result in the stream might require a network request, for example to look up permission on a repository or to fetch the full file contents for a search result.
```

For this we always want to:

* Do the network requests in parallel
* Show the results to the user as soon as possible
* Maintain the order of the stream (beacuse we've already ranked the results)

It's difficult to get all three of these right at the same time, so one of the goals I had while writing [Conc's Stream package](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/sourcegraph/conc/stream#Stream) is to abstract away as much of the complexity for that workflow as possible.

> Now I can write custom functions to handle multiple file streams at once using code simliar to the example below. This efficiently and safely gets the contents of each file from a list of file names.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now I can I can fetch the contents of multiple files at once using code similar to the example below. This efficiently and safely gets the contents of each file from while still maintaining the original order of the stream.
```

```go
func streamFileContents(ctx context.Context, fileNames <-chan string, fileContents chan<- string) {
	s := stream.New()
	for fileName := range fileNames {
		fileName := fileName
		s.Go(func() stream.Callback {
			contents := fetchFileContents(ctx, fileName)
			return func() { fileContents <- contents }
		})
	}
	s.Wait()
}
```

## The goals of `conc`

Conc is hopefully already useful to anyone writing concurrent Go code who wants a better way to handle panics, avoid leaking Goroutines, or simply have more readable concurrent code. It's still a young project though and I expect it to evolve and improve over time. One thing I've had to think about is what I *don't* want it to be. 

My main goal with `conc` is that it should be hard to use incorrectly. Concurrent code is infamous for causing headaches and hard-to-identify bugs, and while many developers might feel like they are smart enough to avoid the problems associated with concurrent programming, in reality these bugs can burn anyone.

![Puppies parallel programming](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/upload_ee1c4226c42ba701cde2324025599202.png)

> This goal of "make it hard to use incorrectly" comes with tradeoffs. Specifically, it means some (potentially useful) features are unlikely to be added to conc because they would break this goal. Shortly after the library went public I got a request to [add channels to conc](https://github.com/sourcegraph/conc/issues/56) and while I can see how some advanced user of conc could get value from this, I'd rather keep to the "hard to misuse" goal wherever possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This goal of "make it hard to use incorrectly" comes with tradeoffs. Specifically, it means some (potentially useful) features are unlikely to be added to conc because they would break this goal. Shortly after the library went public I got a request to [add channels to conc](https://github.com/sourcegraph/conc/issues/56) and while I can see how a user of conc could find this valuable, I'd like to keep things "hard to misuse" wherever possible.
```

> ![GitHub issues conversation](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/upload_e8c695bc11b8f2a62ceafaefa0d354dd.png)

Reviewer 2: Can we redact the submitter's name from the screenshot?

![SCC conc statistics](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/upload_622f8a97c46fe4a1742ac48e45a35c2d.png)

(Calculated using [scc](https://github.com/boyter/scc).)

### challenge #1: Keeping the API natural and unsurprising
To me, the API feels very natural now and most of the tweaks I did were to extend the goal of making it hard to use incorrectly. From my experience with other libraries, and looking at other concurrency implementations for inspiration, I found that nearly all of them suffer from at least one of the following problems.

* They feel **unnatural** to use 
* They contain many **foot guns** or they make it easy to do dangerous things without realizing
* They make it **hard to understand** what's actually happening under the hood
* They contain **surprising** implementation details that catch users off guard

Often I found that I had to reduce the feature set of Conc in order to keep it simple and safe. I've made some slight tweaks after getting some feedback from users that further these goals. 

> For example, at Sourcegraph we generally use `GO_MAX_PROCS` to limit Goroutines to the number of core available. For us, that's often a sane default, but Go's scheduler can happily spawn 1000s of routines. For a majority of users, having this somewhat arbitrary limit was **surprising**, so by following the goal of "follow the principle of least surprise" it made sense to remove this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, at Sourcegraph we generally use `GO_MAX_PROCS` to limit Goroutines to the number of core available. For us, that's often a sane default, but Go's scheduler can happily handle 1000s of routines. For a majority of users, having this somewhat arbitrary limit was **surprising**, so by following the goal of "follow the principle of least surprise" it made sense to remove this.
```

> ### challenge #2: Discovering edge cases while handling panics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### challenge #2: Discovering edge cases with panics
```

> Panics aren't meant to be used as a way of exception handling, but while writing `conc` I needed to be able to catch and handle panics. One thing I learned about Go in spite of coding in it for years is that when you intercept a panic with a `nil` value, it will look like nothing actually went wrong.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Panics aren't meant to be used as a way of exception handling, but I need `conc` to behave well even when a user gives it code that panics. One thing I learned about Go in spite of coding in it for years is that when you intercept a panic with a `nil` value, it will look like nothing actually went wrong.
```

For example, running hte following code will print "did not panic", even though a panic occurs.

```go
package main

func main() {
	defer func() {
		if r := recover(); r != nil {
			println("caught a panic!")
		} else {
			println("did not panic")
		}
	}()

	panic(nil)
}
```

## Releasing `conc` to the world

After I made the GitHub repository public, I posted about `conc` internally. I expected my coworkers to look over it and maybe give some comments or criticism, but it quickly got shared over [to Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/golang/comments/1022agb/conc_better_structured_concurrency_for_go/), where it received a bit of (mainly positive) attention. There's since been some discussion [on GitHub](https://github.com/sourcegraph/conc/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed) and [on Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=34344514) and I've made some small tweaks based on feedback.

> It's been fun to watch `conc` spreading across GitHub as people discover it. Currently there are [423 matches](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=context%3Aglobal+sourcegraph%2Fconc&patternType=standard&sm=1&groupBy=repo) for `sourcegraph/conc`. Many of these are automatic summaries of trending repositories or similar, but it's also made its way for example into [Kong](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/-/blob/internal/dataplane/kong_client.go) already.

Reviewer 2: I'm a little uncomfortable specifically calling out projects that are using it, and the sourcegraph search doesn't really provide much interesting info other than "this appeared on a lot of lists." I think I'd prefer we drop this paragraph

> If you're using or expecting to use `conc` in your own project, please continue the conversation. I'm keen to make `conc` the easiest and sanest way to manage concurrency in Go.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a note about reaching out in the github issues?

> Internally now I'm working on simplifying parts of the Sourcegraph codebase to use `conc` instead of naked Goroutines or other workarounds to handle panics in concurrent code. 

Reviewer 2: The previous sentence seems like a good end note, so this feels like a slightly awkward paranthetical. We can probably just drop it.

> 

Reviewer: Mention they can join the community on Discrod https://discord.gg/bvXQXmtRjN
